If we can ensure that 80% of our children can read and write well in any one language by the time they are nine years old, we would have solved 80% of our educational problems.

Reading tests need to be made available on computers, tablets and mobile phones so that parents can determine the reading levels of their children.



Staff at P.S. 50, the Clara Barton School, in the South Bronx,
consider a strong belief in the school as the central agent in
shaping the future lives of their students. They believe that
they need to impart to their students a vision of life outside
the South Bronx, a vision that includes being a productive
worker with a steady job. The teachers frequently tell each
other, their students, and neighborhood families the stories
of former students who have become successful, and
include in those stories the role played by the school,
individual staff, and parents in the students’ success. Staff
at Clara Barton have built the importance of employment
and work life into all school activities. Former students are
used as guest speakers at career days; their work places are
sites for field trips. Role models for jobs and careers are
brought to the school to interact with students. Entrepre-
neurial opportunities are part of school life. As a community
w are decisions communicated to the full school community?
Are you able to have staff conversations about your school’s
strengths and weaknesses?

school, on weekends Clara Barton becomes a literacy and
computer center for the parents of students so that they
might also participate in building the skills for getting a job
or improving their work opportunities.



How would staff and parents describe the essence of what your school does for its students?

What is special about the culture of your school compared to other schools in the district?

On what occasions do you talk about your school’s identity?

Do you currently have any teams? What is the staff ’s attitude toward teaming?

Which aspects of the school would benefit from a broader perspective or from expanded input into decision making?

Who currently participates on the team(s) in place?

What are the purposes of teams that exist now?

How much autonomy and power do teams have?

How well do the teams function?

what types of training and support would enhance teams in your school?

What would be the negative effects of increasing the use of teams in your school?

To what extent is decentralized decision making used?

If it is decentralized, what structures does your school have in place for coordinating the work of teams or subcommittees?

Do most staff trust that their colleagues are working together toward positive student outcomes?

What kinds of decisions are delegated by the central decision-making team to other teams?

What proportion of staff in your school are involved in decision making?

How are decisions communicated to the full school community?

Are you able to have staff conversations about your school’s strengths and weaknesseschool has implemented structural changes, what have been the results?

What types of structural changes might make a difference for your students? Why?

What other consequences would those changes be likely to have?

If parents could choose, what kinds of structural changes would they make in your school?

Which types of potential changes worry you? Why?

What might be useful to pilot?

What resources would be needed to conduct a pilot?

Which of your staff are ready to try out pilots?

What iff you have used piloting as a technique, what have you learned?

What supports and what diminishes piloting as an option in your school?

To what extent do staff regularly meet to talk about what they have learned about a particular program?

What issues do they identify as necessary to address in order to serve student needs?

When do staff come together to talk about teaching and learning?

What are the expectations for staff to continue their professional development?

What projects or programs have provided staff with opportunities to explore new strategies for better meeting the needs of students?

What are the ways in which time, money, and encouragement are provided for individuals or groups of staff to engage in professional development?a

What mechanisms currently exist for bringing in new information? for training staff? for disseminating knowledge?

What are the organizational supports for seeking out information and skills? 

What gets in the way of efficiently seeking out new information and skills?

How do staff who go outside the school for professional development communicate new learning to others?

In what types of piloting, mentoring, or partnerships that promote shared learning do staff currently engage?

What steps have been taken to realign the use of resources to better serve students?

How would existing resources be re-allocated to better meet current school needs in an ideal world?

In what ways are staff currently connected to networks and organizations that provide access to resources?

How might current connections be expanded?

Has a program been closed and the time and resources reallocated?

If not, where might this be done to good advantage?

Has there been successful resistance to an external initiative that staff honestly thought would not be to the advantage of its students?

If not, what has been the cost?


