
Integration of projects with Strategic Plan requires

1) Strategic Plan : Fundamentally deciding how the organization will compete. Organization uses projects to convert strategy into new products, services and processes needed for success.

2) Creation of a proces that is open and transparent to all participants to review

3) Aligning projects with strategic goals of the organization is crucial for project success. If not it results in poor utilization of people, money, equipment and core competencies.

Planning & Execution ---> Project Manager ----> Getting the job done.

Strategy--Senior Management  ---> Old school Thinking


Achieveing the business results and winning in the market place

New-school thinking recognizes 
that project management is at the apex of  strategy and operations. Aaron Shenhar 
speaks to this issue when he states, “. . . it is time to expand the traditional role of  
the project manager from an operational to a more strategic perspective. In the 
modern evolving organization, project managers will be focused on business as-
pects, and their role will expand from getting the job done to achieving the busi-
ness results and winning in the market place.”



     There are two main reasons why project managers need to understand their orga-
     nization’s mission and strategy. The first reason is so they can make appropriate deci-
     sions  and  adjustments.  For  example,  how  a  project  manager  would  respond  to  a  
     suggestion to modify the design of  a product to enhance performance will vary de-
     pending upon whether his company strives to be a product leader through innovation 
     or to achieve operational excellence through low cost solutions. Similarly, how a proj-
     ect manager would respond to delays may vary depending upon strategic concerns. A 
     project manager will authorize overtime if  her firm places a premium on getting to the 
     market first. Another project manager will accept the delay if  speed is not essential.
          J. P. Descamps has observed that project managers who do not understand the 
	  role their project plays in accomplishing the strategy of  their organization tend to 
	  make the following serious mistakes:
	  •
	     Focusing on problems or solutions that have low priority strategically
	     •
	        Focusing on the immediate customer rather than the whole market place and 
		value chain
		•
		    Overemphasizing  technology  as  an  end  in  and  of   itself,  resulting  in  projects  
		    that wander off  pursuing exotic technology that does not fit the strategy or cus-
		    tomer need
		    •
		        Trying  to  solve  every  customer  issue  with  a  product  or  service  rather  than  
			 focusing on the 20 percent with 80 percent of  the value (Pareto’s Law)
			 •
			    Engaging in a never-ending search for perfection that no one except the project 
			    team really cares about
			        The second reason project managers need to understand their organization’s 
				strategy is so they can be effective project advocates. Project managers have to be 
				able to demonstrate to senior management how their project contributes to their 
				firm’s mission. Protection and continued support come from being aligned with 
				corporate  objectives.  Project  managers  also  need  to  be  able  to  explain  to  team  
				members and other stakeholders why certain project objectives and priorities are 
				critical. This is essential for getting buy-in on contentious trade-off  decisions.
				    For these reasons project managers will find it valuable to have a keen under-
				    standing  of   strategic  management  and  project  selection  processes,






Strategic management is the process of  assessing “what we are” and deciding and imple-
menting “what we intend to be and how we are going to get there.” Strategy describes 
how an organization intends to compete with the resources available in the existing and 
perceived future environment.


Two major dimensions of  strategic management are responding to changes in the 
external environment and allocating scarce resources of  the firm to improve its 
competitive position. Constant scanning of  the external environment for changes 
is a major requirement for survival in a dynamic competitive environment. The 
second dimension is the internal responses to new action programs aimed at en-
hancing the competitive position of  the firm. The nature of  the responses depends 
on the type of  business, environment volatility, competition, and the organiza-
tional culture.
    Strategic management provides the theme and focus of  the future direction of  
    the organization. It supports consistency of  action at every level of  the organiza-
    tion. It encourages integration because effort and resources are committed to com-
    mon goals and strategies.


 Organization Strategy and Project Selection
 long-term position identified, objectives are set, and strategies are developed to 
 achieve  objectives  and  then  translated  into  actions  by  implementing  projects.  
 Strategy can decide the survival of  an organization. Most organizations are suc-
 cessful in 
 formulating




     The  components  of   strategic  management  are  closely  linked,  and  all  are  di-
     rected toward the future success of  the organization. Strategic management re-
     quires strong links among mission, goals, objectives, strategy, and implementation. 
     The mission gives the general purpose of  the organization. Goals give global tar-
     gets within the mission. Objectives give specific targets to goals. Objectives give 
     rise to formulation of  strategies to reach objectives. Finally, strategies require ac-
     tions and tasks to be implemented. In most cases the actions to be taken represent 
     project.


	 Four Activities of the Strategic Management Process
	 The typical sequence of  activities of  the strategic management process is outlined 
	 here; a description of  each activity then follows:
	 1.  Review and define the organizational mission.
	 2.  Set long-range goals and objectives.
	 3.  Analyze and formulate strategies to reach objectives.
	 4.  Implement strategies through projects.



Most organizations are designed to efficiently manage ongoing
activities. Efficiency is achieved primarily by breaking down complex tasks into
simplified, repetitive processes, as symbolized by assembly-line production methods.
Projects are not routine and therefore can be like ducks out of water in these
work environments.


